RESEARCH ARTICLE                            Stream Temperature Prediction in a Shifting Environment:
10.1029/2022WR033880
                                            Explaining the Influence of Deep Learning Architecture
Key Points:
                                            Simon N. Topp1 , Janet Barclay2 , Jeremy Diaz1 , Alexander Y. Sun3                     , Xiaowei Jia4     ,
• Deep learning model architecture
                                            Dan Lu5 , Jeffrey M. Sadler6 , and Alison P. Appling1
   influences the fidelity of learned
   spatial and temporal relationships       1
                                             U.S. Geological Survey, Water Mission Area, Reston, VA, USA, 2U.S. Geological Survey, New England Water Science
• Explainable Artificial Intelligence
   provides both detailed and high-level    Center, East Hartford, CT, USA, 3Bureau of Economic Geology, Jackson School of Geosciences, The University of Texas at
   insight into learned spatiotemporal      Austin, Austin, TX, USA, 4Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 5Computational
   dependencies                             Sciences and Engineering Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA, 6Biosystems and Agricultural
• Spatiotemporal awareness can
                                            Engineering, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK, USA
   boost neural network accuracy, but
   only when training data adequately
   represent spatiotemporal relationships
                                            Abstract Stream temperature is a fundamental control on ecosystem health. Recent efforts incorporating
                                            process guidance into deep learning models for predicting stream temperature have been shown to outperform
Supporting Information:
                                            existing statistical and physical models. This performance is in part because deep learning architectures
Supporting Information may be found in
the online version of this article.
                                            can actively learn spatiotemporal relationships that govern how water and energy propagate through a river
                                            network. However, exploration of how spatiotemporal awareness and process guidance influence a model's
                                            generalizability under shifting environmental conditions such as climate change is limited. Here, we use
Correspondence to:
S. N. Topp,
                                            Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) to interrogate how differing deep learning architectures affect a
stopp@usgs.gov                              model's learned spatial and temporal dependencies, and how those learned dependencies affect a model's
                                            ability to maintain high accuracy when applied to unseen environmental conditions. Using the Delaware River
Citation:                                   Basin in the northeastern United States as a test case, we compare two spatiotemporally aware process-guided
Topp, S. N., Barclay, J., Diaz, J., Sun,    deep learning models for predicting stream temperature (a recurrent graph convolution network—RGCN,
A. Y., Jia, X., Lu, D., et al. (2023).      and a temporal convolution graph model—Graph WaveNet). Both models achieve equally high predictive
Stream temperature prediction in a
shifting environment: Explaining
                                            performance when testing data are well represented in the training data (test root mean squared errors of 1.64°C
the influence of deep learning              and 1.65°C); however, Graph WaveNet significantly outperforms RGCN in 4 out of 5 experiments where test
architecture. Water Resources Research,     partitions represent different types of unseen environmental conditions. XAI results show that the architecture
59, e2022WR033880. https://doi.
org/10.1029/2022WR033880
                                            of Graph WaveNet leads to learned spatial relationships with greater fidelity to physical processes, and that
                                            this fidelity improves the generalizability of the model when applied to shifting and/or unseen environmental
Received 12 OCT 2022                        conditions.
Accepted 6 MAR 2023
                                            Plain Language Summary In a river network, the temperature of the water at a given point depends
Author Contributions:                       on a suite of information that spans space and time. Downstream reaches are influenced by upstream reaches,
Conceptualization: Simon N. Topp,           and an event such as rain today will influence the water temperature tomorrow. Certain types of deep learning
Janet Barclay, Alexander Y. Sun, Alison     models are capable of learning how this type of information moves through a river network to influence stream
P. Appling
Formal analysis: Simon N. Topp              temperature. Existing work shows that using models that incorporate this information improves overall model
Funding acquisition: Alison P. Appling      performance, but little is known about how the differences between deep learning models lead to differences
Investigation: Simon N. Topp                in learned spatial and temporal relationships. Here, we apply a variety of techniques to inspect how two
Methodology: Simon N. Topp, Janet
Barclay, Jeremy Diaz, Alexander Y. Sun,     different models learn spatial and temporal relationships. Our results show that one model learns relationships
Xiaowei Jia, Dan Lu, Alison P. Appling      that intuitively match how we would expect information to move through a river network. This more accurate
Project Administration: Simon N. Topp,      representation of the river system leads to improved model results when using the model to predict stream
Alison P. Appling
                                            temperature in new environmental conditions that were not seen during training.


© 2023 The Authors. This article has        1. Introduction
been contributed to by U.S. Government
employees and their work is in the public   Water temperature is a fundamental control on ecosystem health that directly affects aquatic metabolism
domain in the USA.
This is an open access article under        (Yvon-Durocher et al., 2010), nutrient cycling (Greaver et al., 2016), and habitat suitability (Ebersole et al., 2001).
the terms of the Creative Commons           In streams and rivers, anthropogenic stressors such as dams (Lessard & Hayes, 2003) and urbanization (Somers
Attribution License, which permits use,     et al., 2013) are altering long established water temperature regimes. These alterations are expected to be exac-
distribution and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is       erbated by climate change through both rising temperatures (Kaushal et al., 2010) and changes in streamflow
properly cited.                             (van Vliet et al., 2013). Understanding how these cross-scale interactions affect water temperature is essential for




TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                                                 1 of 19
                                                                                                                                                                     19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                                 Water Resources Research                                                       10.1029/2022WR033880


Software: Simon N. Topp, Janet Barclay,   effective management of freshwater resources; however, there is currently no agreed-upon method for accurately
Jeremy Diaz, Xiaowei Jia, Jeffrey M.
                                          predicting stream temperature as environmental conditions change.
Sadler, Alison P. Appling
Supervision: Simon N. Topp, Alison P.     Substantial progress has been made in existing process-based (Dugdale et al., 2017), statistical (Letcher et al., 2016),
Appling
Validation: Simon N. Topp                 and machine learning models (DeWeber & Wagner, 2014) for predicting water temperature in both monitored and
Visualization: Simon N. Topp              unmonitored locations, but less attention has been paid to the performance of these models under shifting domain
Writing – original draft: Simon N. Topp   conditions where stream temperatures are likely to exceed ecologically important thresholds. Although process-based
Writing – review & editing: Simon
N. Topp, Janet Barclay, Jeremy Diaz,      models can theoretically provide predictions under expected future conditions, they are computationally expensive
Alexander Y. Sun, Xiaowei Jia, Dan Lu,    and limited by the extent to which we understand or measure the complex, non-linear relationships between dynamic
Jeffrey M. Sadler, Alison P. Appling      physical variables (Karpatne et al., 2016). Similarly, machine learning approaches can be highly predictive, but can
                                          also be unreliable when predicting outside the bounds of their initial training data (Coveney, 2016; Cunge, 2003), a
                                          serious shortcoming when attempting long-term projections under a changing climate.
                                          Process-guided deep learning (PGDL) is a hybrid form of modeling that combines the strengths of process-based
                                          models with the predictive capability of deep-learning neural networks (Appling et al., 2022; Willard et al., 2022).
                                          Emerging research on PGDL has shown it to outperform traditional modeling approaches in predicting lake
                                          temperature (Daw et al., 2020; Read et al., 2019), lake phosphorous (Hanson et al., 2020), and stream discharge
                                          and temperature (Jia et al., 2021; Konapala et al., 2020). PGDL shows promise both in improving hindcasting
                                          efforts and in retaining high performance as domains begin to shift outside the bounds of their training data. For
                                          example, by pre-training a deep learning model on the outputs of an established process-based model, we can
                                          augment field observations with more spatially and temporally complete model-based “data.” Providing this
                                          additional data allows the model to learn more physically consistent statistical relationships across space and
                                          time and gain exposure to a wider range of input conditions and responses. Existing work highlights that this type
                                          of process guidance is most helpful in data sparse circumstances (Jia et al., 2021) and when generalizing through
                                          time to unseen domain conditions (Read et al., 2019).
                                          One benefit of deep learning approaches, including PGDL, is that they are often highly modular and provide
                                          flexibility in the choice of underlying deep learning architecture. However, little consideration has been given to
                                          how the underlying architecture affects the performance of PGDL models, particularly in situations of domain
                                          shift and generalization, where the distribution of inputs in the target (test) domain are substantially different
                                          than the distribution in the source (train) domain (B. Sun et al., 2016). Testing deep learning model performance
                                          under shifting environmental conditions is challenging because it requires long periods of record that span a
                                          variety of domain conditions. As a key watershed for the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) Next Generation Water
                                          Observing System (Eberts et al., 2019), the Delaware River Basin (DRB) provides a data-rich testing ground for
                                          large-scale stream temperature modeling.
                                          The DRB is an ecologically important watershed providing drinking water to more than 15 million people
                                          (Williamson et al., 2015) as well as habitat for a variety of protected, temperature sensitive species such as
                                          the dwarf wedge mussel (Alasmidonta heterodon) (Rosenberry et al., 2016). The watershed covers more than
                                          35,000 km 2 and spans an elevational gradient from sea level to over 800 m in the northeastern United States.
                                          Within this area, there are nearly 4,800 km of stream and river reaches (National Hydrologic Model; Regan
                                          et al., 2019) with more than 41,000 stream temperature observations between 1980 and 2020. During this histor-
                                          ical record, the basin experienced heat waves, droughts, and floods providing end-member domain conditions for
                                          model training and testing. From a management perspective, Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5
                                          (CMIP5) climate projections (Abatzoglou & Brown, 2012) in the DRB indicate that average air temperatures will
                                          likely increase by 3–7°C by the end of the century (Figure S1 in Supporting Information S1) creating a need to
                                          better understand how these changes will affect key ecological controls like stream temperature.
                                          Here, we use the DRB as a testing ground to measure how deep learning architecture influences stream tempera-
                                          ture predictability under shifting domain conditions. We attempt to answer two specific questions.
                                          1. How does model architecture affect the learned spatial and temporal relationships within spatiotemporally
                                              aware PGDL models?
                                          2. Does the fidelity of learned spatial and temporal relationships directly relate to a model's ability to generalize
                                              as modeling domains shift toward out-of-bounds conditions?
                                          To address these questions, we conduct five generalization experiments to compare to baseline model runs for
                                          two PGDL models (Table S1 in Supporting Information S1). We interrogate the models learned spatial and
                                          temporal dependencies using Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI). Specifically, we compare (a) a Recurrent


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                                               2 of 19
                                                                                                                                                                              19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                                 Water Resources Research                                                             10.1029/2022WR033880




Figure 1. Conceptual diagram of the architectural differences that control for the learning of spatial and temporal dependencies across the two models. Model overview
diagrams adapted from Jia et al. (2021) and Wu et al. (2019) for Recurrent Graph Convolution Network and Graph WaveNet, respectively.


                                          Graph Convolution Network (RGCN; Jia et al., 2021) and (b) a temporal convolution graph network (Graph
                                          WaveNet; Shleifer et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019), both of which we pre-trained on an established process-based
                                          temperature model of the study area (Bartholow, 1991; S. L. Markstrom et al., 2015). Although both architectures
                                          learn spatial and temporal dependencies, the methods in which they learn those relationships are distinct. RGCN
                                          uses a long-short term memory (LSTM) layer to capture the temporal dependencies whereas Graph WaveNet
                                          (GWN) uses a temporal convolutional structure. To aggregate spatial information across the watershed, RGCN
                                          uses a single layer graph convolution compared to diffusion graph convolution in GWN (Figure 1). We interro-
                                          gate the fidelity of the learned spatial and temporal relationships for both models using permutation techniques
                                          and expected gradients (Erion et al., 2021) to better understand when and where models are learning physically
                                          realistic relationships, how those relationships affect a model's generalizability, and what the implications are of
                                          implementing a model under unseen conditions such as changing climate and geographic generalization.


                                          2. Methods
                                          2.1. Recurrent Graph Convolution Network
                                         The RGCN relies on a LSTM architecture for temporal awareness. Specifically, the candidate cell 𝐴𝐴state (𝑐𝑐 ) is
                                                                                                                                                                      𝑡𝑡

                                         calculated using input data for the current timestep
                                                                                        𝐴𝐴    (𝐴𝐴𝑡𝑡 ) and the embedded information from previous timesteps
                                                  following:
                                         ( 𝑡𝑡−1 )
                                  𝐴𝐴      ℎ

                                          (1)
                                            𝑡𝑡
                                          𝑐𝑐 = tanh(𝑊𝑊𝑐𝑐𝑥𝑥 𝑥𝑥𝑡𝑡 + 𝑊𝑊𝑐𝑐ℎ ℎ𝑡𝑡−1 + 𝑏𝑏𝑐𝑐 )

                                          where   𝑐𝑐 represents the candidate cell state at time t and W and b are learnable model parameters. LSTM uses
                                                   𝑡𝑡
                                          𝐴𝐴
                                          gating variables to filter the candidate state and historical information to compute the new cell state. In particular,
                                          it creates three gating variables,
                                                                      𝐴𝐴             𝑖𝑖𝑡𝑡 , and 𝐴𝐴𝑡𝑡 , to represent the forget, input, and output gates typical to the LSTM
                                                                             𝐴𝐴 𝑡𝑡 , 𝐴𝐴
                                          architecture, as follows:

                                          (2)
                                                                                                         (                                )
                                                                                              𝑓𝑓 𝑡𝑡 = 𝜎𝜎 𝑊𝑊𝑓𝑓𝑥𝑥 𝑥𝑥𝑡𝑡 + 𝑊𝑊𝑓𝑓ℎ ℎ𝑡𝑡−1 + 𝑏𝑏𝑓𝑓


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                                                       3 of 19
                                                                                                                                                         19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                      Water Resources Research                                                                  10.1029/2022WR033880



              (3)
                       (                                 )
              𝑖𝑖𝑡𝑡 = 𝜎𝜎 𝑊𝑊𝑖𝑖𝑥𝑥 𝑥𝑥𝑡𝑡 + 𝑊𝑊𝑖𝑖ℎ ℎ𝑡𝑡−1 + 𝑏𝑏𝑖𝑖

              (4)
                       (                                 )
              𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑡 = 𝜎𝜎 𝑊𝑊𝑜𝑜𝑥𝑥 𝑥𝑥𝑡𝑡 + 𝑊𝑊𝑜𝑜ℎ ℎ𝑡𝑡−1 + 𝑏𝑏𝑜𝑜

              In this implementation, latent information
                                                   𝐴𝐴      𝐴𝐴 for each 𝐴𝐴
                                                                        reach 𝐴𝐴 at timestep𝐴𝐴  𝐴𝐴 − 1 is calculated from the previous
              hidden representation following Equation 5.

              (5)
                                                                        (                     )
                                                        𝑞𝑞𝑗𝑗 𝑡𝑡−1 = tanh 𝑊𝑊𝑞𝑞 ℎ𝑗𝑗 𝑡𝑡−1 + 𝑏𝑏𝑞𝑞

              To calculate each new cell𝐴𝐴state 𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗𝑡𝑡, we incorporate spatial awareness by aggregating the latent information from
              reach j and adjacent reaches
                                    𝐴𝐴      𝐴𝐴 using the gating variables to filter the historical information:
                                                                    (                       )
                                                                            ∑                      𝑡𝑡
              (6)                                       𝑡𝑡      𝑡𝑡    𝑡𝑡−1
                                                       𝑐𝑐𝑗𝑗 = 𝑓𝑓𝑗𝑗 ⊗ 𝑐𝑐𝑗𝑗 +            𝑡𝑡−1
                                                                              𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗 𝑞𝑞𝑘𝑘     + 𝑐𝑐 𝑗𝑗 ⊗ 𝑖𝑖𝑡𝑡𝑗𝑗
                                                                                (𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗)


              𝐴𝐴Here, 𝐴𝐴 is an adjacency matrix containing the normalized upstream and downstream distances between all reach
               pairs within the network. For each reach𝐴𝐴pair 𝐴𝐴𝐴 𝐴𝐴 the distance is calculated              𝐴𝐴 as 𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗 = 1∕(1 + exp(dist(𝑗𝑗𝑗 𝑗𝑗)))
               such𝐴𝐴 that 𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗 equals zero where there is no connectivity𝐴𝐴(i.e., dist(𝑗𝑗𝑗  𝐴𝐴𝑗𝑗) = ∞) and increases as the river distance
               between
                  𝐴𝐴      𝐴𝐴𝐴 𝐴𝐴 decreases. The adjacency matrix, combined with latent information         𝐴𝐴    ( 𝐴𝐴 ), allows RGCN to propagate
               local reach scale information throughout the network such that all subsequent states/gates are informed by the
               global state of the river network. Both upstream and downstream reach pairings are included to account for poten-
               tial tidal influences, reservoirs, and correlative relationships that may exist between upstream/downstream pairs.
               The static distance representations     𝐴𝐴 in 𝐴𝐴 are modified by the learned representation of the importance of daily
               information transfer between all pairs of reaches in the river network    𝐴𝐴       ( 𝐴𝐴 ). In Equation 6, the forget gate modifies
               information from both the target 𝐴𝐴      reach 𝐴𝐴 and neighboring reaches
                                                                                     𝐴𝐴       𝐴𝐴 as weighted by the adjacency matrix 𝐴𝐴     𝐴𝐴, and
               the current cell𝐴𝐴state 𝐴𝐴 𝑡𝑡 is calculated as a combination of the current candidate cell state and partly forgotten infor-
               mation about the local and nearby cell states at the previous timestep.

               (7)
                                                                                        ( )
                                                                      ℎ𝑡𝑡 = 𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑡 ⊗ tanh 𝑐𝑐 𝑡𝑡

              Finally, the embedded information
                                            𝐴𝐴   𝐴 at𝐴𝐴time 𝐴𝐴 is calculated via the elementwise product of the current𝐴𝐴state 𝐴𝐴
              and the output gate from Equation 4. Final predictions are then calculated by passing the hidden states through a
              fully connected output layer.


              2.2. Graph WaveNet

              Graph WaveNet (Wu et al., 2019) achieves temporal awareness using dilated causal convolutions (Yu &
              Koltun, 2016). For each𝐴𝐴   reach 𝐴𝐴 , we perform a series of one-dimensional (1D) temporal convolutions with a dila-
              tion 𝐴𝐴
                    factor 𝐴𝐴 that increases the number of timesteps to skip with each consecutive convolution. For example, the
              first layer of temporal convolution of a sequence with n timesteps and a kernel size of two will convolve timesteps
              1 and 2, 3 and 4, all the way to n − 1 and n. In the second layer, the dilation factor increases to two leading to
              the convolution of timesteps 1 and 3, 5 and 7, all the way to n − 2 and n. By increasing the steps skipped in each
              subsequent layer, the dilated convolution allows for an exponential growth in the receptive field with model depth.
              For each 1D sequence
                                 𝐴𝐴     𝐴𝐴 and𝐴𝐴filter 𝐴𝐴 𝐴𝐴 𝐴𝐴𝐾𝐾 , the dilated convolution
                                                                                        𝐴𝐴 of 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴with 𝐴𝐴 at timestep
                                                                                                                𝐴𝐴    𝐴𝐴 can be represented as
                             𝐾𝐾−1
              (8)
                             ∑
              𝑥𝑥 𝑥 𝑥𝑥 (𝑡𝑡) =      𝑓𝑓 (𝑠𝑠)𝑥𝑥(𝑡𝑡 − 𝑑𝑑 × 𝑠𝑠)
                                                                             𝑠𝑠=0


              In GWN, this dilated temporal convolution is gated to control the flow of temporal information through model
              layers. The results
                          𝐴𝐴      𝐴𝐴 of Equation 8 are passed through an output gate defined as

              ℎ = tanh(𝑾1 𝑿 + 𝑏1 ) ⊗ 𝜎(𝑾 2 𝑿 + 𝑏2 )
              (9)

              where
              𝐴𝐴     𝐴 is the hidden state to be passed to the graph convolution,
                                                                                𝐴𝐴     𝐴 is the element-wise product,𝐴𝐴 and 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 and 𝐴𝐴
              are learnable model parameters.   𝐴𝐴 The tanh(⋅) is the activation function for learned temporal relationships
                                                                                                                          𝐴𝐴 and 𝐴𝐴(⋅)
              acts as a gate to filter the information passed to each subsequent layer of the model.


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                                  4 of 19
                                                                                                                                                     19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                          Water Resources Research                                                            10.1029/2022WR033880


                   Temporal convolution layers are combined with diffusion graph convolution (Li et al., 2018) to provide spatial
                   awareness. This can be expressed as

                      ∑
                      𝐾
                   𝑍=
                   (10)𝑃𝑓𝑘 𝑿𝑾𝑘1 + 𝑃𝑏𝑘 𝑿𝑾𝑘2
                                                                       𝑘=0


                   where Z denotes the output 𝐴𝐴 and 𝐴𝐴 represents the power series of the transition matrices of the graph network with
              𝐴𝐴   𝐴𝐴 finite steps such that
                                          𝐴𝐴 the 𝐴𝐴 th element of the series diffuses information to k-hop neighborhoods   𝐴𝐴    (𝐴𝐴 =
                                                                                                                                     𝐴𝐴 0 to 𝐴𝐴 ).
                   In other words,
                             𝐴𝐴     𝐴𝐴 = 0 represents the node itself, and as k increases from zero, the graph signals processed move
                   from direct node neighbors (local) to increasingly expanding node neighborhoods (global) in a recursive manner.
                   Here, we use a diffusion step
                                               𝐴𝐴 of 𝐴𝐴 = 2. In the case of a directed graph network,
                                                                                                   𝐴𝐴    𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑓𝑓 and 𝐴𝐴𝑏𝑏 represent the forward
                   and backward transition matrices, respectively, calculated 𝐴𝐴 as 𝐴𝐴∕rowsum(𝐴𝐴)𝐴𝐴 and 𝐴𝐴𝑇𝑇 ∕rowsum 𝐴𝐴𝑇𝑇 .
                                                                                                                           ( )

                   In addition to a predefined adjacency matrix
                                                          𝐴𝐴    𝐴𝐴, GWN adds an additional term to learn spatial relationships that
                   are missing or poorly defined within the node connections
                                                                         𝐴𝐴 of 𝐴𝐴. This adaptive adjacency matrix is defined as

                   (11)
                   𝐴𝐴adp = Sof tMax ReLU 𝑬𝑬 1 𝑬𝑬 𝑇𝑇2
                                   (    (            ))


                   where
                   𝐴𝐴      𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴1 and 𝐴𝐴2 are learnable node embedding matrices representing source nodes and targets nodes, respec-
                   tively. When multiplied together, these learnable embeddings create an n by n matrix (where n is the number
                   of nodes in the graph) to capture otherwise undefined spatial dependency weights of the graph network. The
                   adaptive adjacency matrix defined in Equation 11 is combined with the diffusion graph convolution defined in
                   Equation 10 to form the full spatial component of GWN:

                      ∑
                      𝐾
                   𝑍=
                   (12)𝑃𝑓𝑘 𝑿𝑾𝑘1 + 𝑃𝑏𝑘 𝑿𝑾𝑘2 + 𝐴𝑘adp 𝑿𝑾𝑘3
                                                                𝑘=0


                   Finally, the outputs of the spatial convolutions are passed through a convolution layer with a kernel size of one,
                   which acts as a fully connected output layer to generate the final predictions.

                   In summary, GWN captures temporal relationships with 1D dilated convolution filters that traverse the time
                   dimension, the outputs of which are passed through a diffusion graph network with user-defined and adaptive
                   adjacency matrices to capture spatial relationships at each timestep. These two key architectural features are
                   combined with residual connections that link the input to the temporal convolutions with the output of the graph
                   convolutions.

                   The major difference between GWN and RGCN is in how they model the temporal and spatial dependencies
                   (Figure 1). In the spatial convolution process, GWN explicitly considers multi-hop information propagation
                   whereas RGCN only aggregates the data from one-hop neighbors. When modeling the temporal patterns, GWN
                   uses the temporal convolutional structure whereas RGCN uses the LSTM structure. The temporal convolutional
                   structure is more stable in the gradient-based optimization process whereas the recurrent structure in LSTM in
                   RGCN can suffer from the gradient explosion problem (Bengio et al., 2013). Moreover, the LSTM structure
                   cannot be easily parallelized because the computation for each timestep requires the embedded output from the
                   previous timestep. Finally, the models differ in the order of aggregating spatial and temporal information. RGCN
                   feeds the aggregated information from the spatial neighborhood to the LSTM layer whereas GWN feeds the
                   temporal convolution output to the graph convolution layer.


                   2.3. Model Training

                   Input data for modeling include daily meteorological drivers (air temperature, precipitation, shortwave radiation,
                   and potential evapotranspiration), reach characteristics (stream width, slope, and elevation), and an adjacency
                   matrix for 455 river reaches within the DRB from 1980 to 2020 (Oliver et al., 2021). Within the adjacency matrix,
                   each reach is represented by a node while edges capture upstream and downstream connectivity in terms of river
                   distance. The adjacency matrix is bidirectional such that upstream and downstream distances are considered.
                   The models are trained on more than 41,000 temperature observations derived from 2,185 stream sites spread
                   throughout the basin.


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                               5 of 19
                                                                                                                                        19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                    Water Resources Research                                                       10.1029/2022WR033880


              Both models were trained using the USGS river-dl codebase (Sadler et al., 2022). Lookback period and prediction
              sequence length were hypertuned using a coarse grid-search approach based on validation partition performance.
              This hypertuning was undertaken after initial efforts showed that both models were sensitive to the amount of
              antecedent information provided prior to a target prediction. Although both models showed sensitivity, variations
              were greater for GWN which does not use a recurrent structure to learn temporal dependencies. Here, lookback
              period refers to the total number of timesteps leading up to each input sequence, whereas prediction sequence
              length refers to the number of timesteps predicted in sequence-to-sequence prediction. For example, a 90-day
              lookback period with a 90-day prediction sequence would have inputs for 180 days but only make predictions
              on the last 90. Learning rates for both models were determined by examining training curves, and the number
              of hidden units were inherited from Jia et al.'s (2021) original implementation of RGCN in the study area. A
              full table of the explored hyperparameter space and final chosen values can be found in Table S2 in Supporting
              Information S1. Models were trained using the Adam optimizer with loss calculated as masked root mean squared
              error (RMSE) to account for missing values in the observations.
              2.3.1. Pre-Training and Fine-Tuning

              Process guidance through pre-training on process-based model outputs is a method for teaching deep learn-
              ing models physical relationships and expanding the range of the response variable seen during training (Jia
              et al., 2021; Read et al., 2019). All models were pre-trained for 100 epochs on process-based model results from
              the Precipitation-Runoff Modeling System (PRMS) (Markstrom et al., 2015) and Stream-Network TEMPerature
              model (SNTEMP) (Bartholow, 1991), as combined by Markstrom (2012) and Sanders et al. (2017), and then
              fine-tuned on stream temperature observations. PRMS is a modular physical model that simulates hydrologic
              responses to various combinations of climate and land uses. SNTEMP is a 1D, computationally efficient water
              temperature model developed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Bartholow, 1991). The model uses heat
              fluxes, stream distance, and various metrics of stream geomorphology and hydrology to predict daily mean
              and maximum water temperatures. Jia et al. (2021) showed that using this pretraining technique significantly
              improved modeling performance, particularly for areas with sparse observational data.
              For each scenario described below, models were trained in replicates of 10 pre-training and fine-tuning training
              runs, each beginning with a different random seed to initialize the neural network weights, with the final results
              representing the average of the 10 replicates. Compared to a cross-validation approach where various folds may
              contain inconsistent spatiotemporal representations of the study domain, using replicates with random initializa-
              tions provides a measure of optimization stability and ensures that the representativeness between data partitions
              is consistent across models and scenario runs. In each replicate, fine-tuning weights were initialized with the
              pre-trained weights and then fine-tuned on stream temperature observations using RMSE as the objective func-
              tion. The pre-training/fine-tuning process followed Read et al. (2019) where all model weights were allowed to be
              adjusted during fine-tuning (i.e., no layers were frozen). When fine-tuning, we used an early stopping criterion of
              20 epochs (training stopped if validation partition performance did not improve for 20 consecutive epochs) and a
              dropout value of 0.3 to avoid overfitting to the training data. All models were trained on the USGS Tallgrass HPC
              system (Falgout et al., 2022) on a single Nvidia V100 SXM2 GPU.

              2.4. Scenarios for Generalization Tests

              We developed six different scenarios where training, validation, and testing partitions were selected to simulate
              varying types of generalization with real-world analogs (see Tables S4–S9 in Supporting Information S1 for
              partition details for each scenario). First, we trained baseline scenarios for each model by partitioning the input
              data such that the distribution of input conditions in the testing partition were well represented in the training
              data. Partitions for the baseline scenarios were determined by consensus from modelers across multiple projects
              to ensure cross-project comparability, similar domain distributions between splits, and sufficient observations
              within training, validation, and testing partitions. For the remaining scenarios, three focused on geographic
              generalization and two focused on domain shift of climatic drivers for the entire basin. Here, we use domain
              shift to refer to a directional change in one or more of the model inputs such that the distribution of the input in
              the testing partition is substantially different than the distribution in the training partition. For all scenarios and
              experiments, we use water years (starting on October 1) as opposed to calendar years for temporal splits. This
              choice is based on common practice in hydrology studies. Domain conditions in October (when the water year
              starts) represent pre-snow-fall conditions. This is in comparison to the calendar year, where precipitation falling
              in the latter part of the previous calendar year may not drain out of a watershed until the following spring.


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                  6 of 19
                                                                                                                                                                        19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                                Water Resources Research                                                          10.1029/2022WR033880




Figure 2. From left to right: Level III ecoregions within the Delaware River Basin, binned ecoregion test groups each containing ∼33% of stream temperature
observations, and total temperature observations by stream reach.



                                         For scenarios of geographic generalization, we binned level III ecoregions (Omernik, 1987) within the basin
                                         so that each bin contained nearly equal proportions of the total number of stream temperature observations
                                         (Figure 2). These binned regions represent biogeophysically distinct units, ranging from mountainous headwater
                                         regions down to low relief coastal plains. Each model was trained on two of the binned regions with the third
                                         held out for testing. These geographic generalization scenarios are meant to better understand prediction both in
                                         ungauged reaches and in biogeophysical regions that are not represented within the training data.

                                         The final two scenarios capture domain shift of meteorological inputs representative of (a) long-term projections
                                         where average air temperatures are higher than during the period of observations (Warming), and (b) a low
                                         precipitation scenario to better understand model performance during periods of extended drought (Drought)
                                         (Figure 3). For the temperature shift scenario, the 10 water years with the warmest average summer time temper-
                                         atures were held out for testing, five water years representing normal conditions were set aside for validation, and
                                         the remaining record was retained for training. This scenario specifically focuses on summer months that are most
                                         likely to represent boundary conditions represented in the training data. This partitioning led to a median summer
                                         (June, July, August—JJA) testing temperature 1.27°C warmer than the training temperature. Comparatively, in
                                         the baseline scenario, median summer air temperatures in training and testing partitions are the same. For the
                                         drought holdout, the seven water years with officially declared droughts (DRBC, 2019) plus three additional
                                         water years with the lowest median annual rainfall across reaches were withheld for testing, five water years
                                         representing normal conditions were set aside for validation, and the remainder was retained for training. As a
                                         result, the median annual precipitation in the testing partition is 17% less than in the training partition. For the
                                         drought scenario, the training partition does not contain any official droughts that trigger substantial management
                                         changes throughout the basin. Therefore, the drought scenario represents domain shift in two distinct ways, both
                                         to generally drier conditions as well as to a different management regime.

                                         Although these scenarios are meant to represent potential future climates, it's worth noting that projected changes
                                         in temperature and precipitation may not follow the same distributions as historical end-member years. Particularly
                                         for temperature, changes are projected to be disproportionately skewed toward the high tails (Fan et al., 2020).
                                         Similarly, although we explicitly target temperature and precipitation for the two scenarios, withholding end


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                                                   7 of 19
                                                                                                                                                  19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                     Water Resources Research                                                            10.1029/2022WR033880




              Figure 3. Distribution of summer (June, July, August) temperature (left) and annual mean precipitation (right) for the
              baseline scenario compared to the scenarios representing domain shift for the region. Box extents represent first–third
              quartiles. Whiskers represent values within 1.5 times the interquartile range. Diamonds represent outliers.



              member years of the target variables leads to differences in the distributions of non-target variables (Tables S4–
              S9 in Supporting Information S1). This correlation between meteorological drivers is true for real-world shifts
              in domain condition as well but warrants mentioning due to its implications for interpreting performance across
              the scenarios.

              Across all scenarios, we calculated performance using RMSE, Nash-Sutcliffe Efficiency (NSE), and bias. RMSE
              and NSE are both reported to provide a more thorough understanding of model performance. As shown by
              Legates and McCabe (1999), RMSE and NSE are complementary metrics in that the former provides absolute
              error in easily interpretable units (°C) whereas the latter measures relative goodness of fit. For all model runs,
              error metrics were calculated for the entire test partition, by reach, by month, and for the warmest 10% of obser-
              vations. Significant differences (p < 0.05) in overall performance were calculated by applying a two-sample t test
              (Student, 1908) between the 10 replicate runs for the target models of interest.


              2.5. Expected Gradients and Permutation-Based XAI

              XAI is a rapidly growing aspect of the deep learning field that specifically focuses on increasing the transpar-
              ency and interpretability of otherwise “black-box” modeling approaches. When done effectively, XAI improves
              understanding of model predictions, assists in identifying causality within complex architectures, enhances our
              ability to diagnose and refine models, and helps assess transferability/robustness of models when moving to new
              domains (Marcinkevičs & Vogt, 2020). Here, we apply permutation techniques and expected gradients (Erion
              et al., 2021) to better understand mechanisms underpinning model predictions.

              The permutation experiments involve shuffling subsets of our input datasets to remove existing statistical rela-
              tionships. The change in prediction between the original and shuffled inputs then acts as a measure of sensitivity
              and input importance (Fisher et al., 2019). Here, we specifically apply permutation-based variable importance
              across space (reaches) and times (inputs leading to target predictions).

              For the spatial permutation-based experiments, we generated predictions across two water years in the test parti-
              tion (2014/2015) using the best (lowest RMSE) of the 10 replicate baseline models for GWN and RGCN. We
              then iterated through all the reaches in the basin and retained the true input values for the target reach but shuf-
              fled the inputs for all other reaches to noise the learned spatial relationships within the model. Shuffling, as
              opposed to replacing inputs with random values, ensures that inputs are still within realistic ranges for all varia-
              bles as opposed to artificially constrained to a certain distribution. We subsequently calculated the mean absolute


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                             8 of 19
                                                                                                                                      19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                    Water Resources Research                                                      10.1029/2022WR033880


              difference in prediction between the shuffled and un-shuffled inputs as a proxy for how much each model was
              relying on information passed to it from neighboring reaches.

              Temporal permutation experiments followed a methodology similar to spatial permutations but were done season-
              ally to capture time-varying effects of drivers of stream temperature. For both GWN and RGCN, test sequences
              were binned based on the season in which the last day of the sequence fell. For each season (JJA—June, July,
              August; SON—September, October, November; DJF—December, January, February; MAM—March, April,
              May), we randomly selected 30 test sequences, calculated predictions using the best performing baseline models,
              and then iteratively re-calculated predictions after shuffling inputs for n days at the beginning of the sequence. We
              then calculated the mean absolute change in prediction for the last value of the sequence between the un-shuffled
              predictions and the shuffled predictions. This process was repeated until all but the 2 days prior to the target
              prediction were composed of noised values. Based on hypertuning, for GWN the last day of the sequence has a
              lookback period of 60 days whereas for RGCN the last day of the sequence has a lookback period of 180 days
              leading to iteratively shuffling t1 through t1 to t58 and t1 through t1 to t178 for GWN and RGCN, respectively.

              Permutation-based interpretation approaches are valuable because of their relative simplicity; however, these
              experiments do not necessarily satisfy the axioms required for robust explainability and can therefore lead to
              incorrect attribution interpretations (Sundararajan et al., 2017). For example, permutations are inherently random,
              and therefore repeatedly shuffling inputs may lead to varying measures of importance or sensitivity and thus lack
              implementation invariance. We address this shortcoming by complementing the permutation-based interpretabil-
              ity experiments with expected gradients to more systematically understand learned spatiotemporal relationships
              for both models. Expected gradients are a feature attribution method that calculates the change in prediction
              with regard to the change in inputs as one moves from a baseline input sequence to the target input sequence for
              which attribution values are being calculated. Compared to its predecessor, integrated gradients (Sundararajan
              et al., 2017), expected gradients remove the need to arbitrarily choose a baseline sample by iteratively sampling
              random sequences from the actual data. As a result, expected gradients have fewer hyperparameters and still
              satisfy the axioms of implementation invariance, sensitivity, completeness, linearity, and symmetry-preservation.

              Expected gradients are generally used for local prediction attribution within a single sequence rather than to
              understand global model mechanics. To move from single prediction attribution to high-level model understand-
              ing, we take a similar approach to the permutation experiments and calculate the average absolute attribution of
              a given feature across multiple sequences to better understand high level model function. Calculating expected
              gradients is more computationally demanding than simple permutation-based interpretability, so we use three
              example stream reaches throughout the network to explore spatial dependencies in more detail. Specifically, for
              both model architectures, we calculate the mean percent contribution of inputs throughout the network to the
              predicted values for each of the three example reaches. Mean contributions are calculated over the course of two
              water years within our test partition to fully cover potential seasonal variations that may influence driver attribu-
              tion. Specifically, we calculate mean contributions for all predictions in water years 2014/2015.

              To examine temporal feature attribution, we calculate the expected gradients with regards to the last prediction
              of the sequence for the 38 test sequences where GWN and RGCN both end on the same day. We then bin these
              sequences by season to better understand how model memory and feature importance change throughout the
              year. Reported values between the spatial and temporal expected gradients vary slightly. Spatial expected gradi-
              ent results are reported as percent of total attribution. In the temporal experiments, we retain the raw expected
              gradients rather than converting them to a percent attribution to examine directionality of effects across seasons.


              3. Results
              3.1. Baseline Comparisons

              Results from the baseline scenario show no significant difference (p = 0.76) in the average overall performance
              between GWN and RGCN across the 10 replicate runs. GWN and RGCN achieve overall RMSEs of 1.65°C (0.95
              NSE) and 1.64°C (0.95 NSE) respectively. These results can be compared to the process-based model used for
              pre-training, which achieves an RMSE of 3.66°C (Jia et al., 2021). Results for the PGDL models after pre-training
              but before fine-tuning show that both models are comparable to the process-based model with RMSEs of 3.78°C
              (0.74 NSE) and 3.79°C (0.75 NSE) for GWN and RGCN, respectively, prior to training on actual observa-
              tions. Both models show very similar spatial and temporal patterns of performance across reaches and months


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                9 of 19
                                                                                                                                       19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                    Water Resources Research                                                      10.1029/2022WR033880




              Figure 4. Comparison of overall baseline model results for Graph WaveNet (GWN) and Recurrent Graph Convolution
              Network (RGCN) across space (top) and seasonally (bottom).


              (Figure 4). Generally, performance for both models decreases in the summer months when hotter temperatures
              and anthropogenic disturbances like reservoir releases are more prevalent. RGCN shows some seasonality in its
              bias, with a slight tendency to overpredict temperatures during the winter months.
              Performance is substantially worse for the 16 reaches with observations in the test partition that either contain or
              are directly downstream from a reservoir, with median RMSEs of 1.98°C (0.88 NSE) and 1.96°C (0.89 NSE) for
              RGCN and GWN respectively. Of particular interest are end-member predictions, such as very high temperatures
              that exceed thresholds for sensitive species. GWN significantly outperforms RGCN (p = 0.003) for the hottest
              10% of temperature predictions within the baseline test partition (Figure S2 in Supporting Information S1), with
              an RMSE of 1.79°C (−0.21 NSE) for GWN compared to 1.95°C (−0.40 NSE) for RGCN. This improved perfor-
              mance for high temperatures is likely in part attributable to differences in the underlying architectures. The
              one-layer LSTM used in RGCN is reliant on the temporal patterns from previous timesteps to the next timestep
              extracted by a fixed sequential structure, and thus smooths the prediction, potentially decreasing its performance
              for end-member observations. In contrast, the temporal convolution in GWN uses a dilated structure, which
              provides more flexibility in controlling the size of receptive fields over the temporal sequence (Nan et al., 2021).
              Computationally, GWN is more efficient in terms of training time, with average wallclock times of 13.8, 9.0, and
              0.4 s per epoch for pre-training, fine-tuning, and validation prediction, respectively. RGCN takes approximately
              twice as long, with average pre-training, fine-tuning, and prediction times of 49.3, 19.4, and 0.9 s per epoch. Across
              replicates, GWN on average triggers early stopping during fine-tuning after 137 epochs compared to 141 for
              RGCN, such that total pre-training plus fine-tuning times are on average 44 min for GWN and 130 min for RGCN.


              3.2. Generalization Scenarios

              Although baseline accuracy across the two architectures shows few significant differences, GWN signifi-
              cantly outperforms RGCN in both domain shift experiments and two of the three generalization scenarios.


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                10 of 19
                                                                                                                                             19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                     Water Resources Research                                                           10.1029/2022WR033880



               Table 1
               Comparison of Test Root Mean Squared Error (Mean With Standard Error in Parentheses Across 10 Replicates) for
               Baseline and Generalization Scenario Runs Between Graph WaveNet (GWN) and Recurrent Graph Convolution Network
               (RGCN)
               RMSE(°C); mean (SE)

               Scenario                     GWN-overall            RGCN-overall           GWN-warmest 10%           RGCN-warmest 10%
               Baseline                      1.65 (0.01)             1.64 (0.01)             1.79 (0.02)***              1.95 (0.03)
               Domain shift
                 Drought                     1.7 (0.01)**            1.74 (0.02)             1.85 (0.03)***              2.12 (0.05)
                 Warming                     1.65 (0.01)***          1.72 (0.02)             1.7 (0.03)***               1.93 (0.05)
               Geographic shift
                 Plateau                     3.29 (0.03)**           3.42 (0.05)             2.32 (0.05)                 2.42 (0.08)
                 Appalachians                2.34 (0.05)             2.36 (0.06)             4.02 (0.13)                 3.56 (0.17)**
                 Coastal                     2.38 (0.06)***          3.26 (0.16)             3.83 (0.1)***               5.09 (0.31)
               Note. Bold italic values represent the best performing models overall and for the warmest 10% of observations. significance
               determined by two-sample t-tests across 10 replicate runs for each model and noted when the difference is outside the 90%
               (*), 95% (**), and 99% (***) confidence intervals.


              This consistently higher performance indicates that GWN is more capable of maintaining accurate predictions
              as conditions move toward out-of-bounds situations (Table 1, see Table S3 in Supporting Information S1 for
              NSE). GWN also does significantly better (p < 0.05) in both domain shift scenarios and one of the geographic
              generalization scenarios regarding the warmest 10% of predictions that are of particular interest ecologically and
              from a management perspective. Comparatively, RGCN outperforms GWN for the warmest 10% of predictions
              in the Appalachians geographic generalization scenario.
              The overall loss of performance between baseline models and generalization scenarios is significant for both
              models and all scenarios except the warming scenario for GWN. However, GWN shows less performance
              loss between the baseline and generalization scenarios for both domain shift experiments and two of the three
              geographic generalization experiments (Figure 5). Overall loss in performance is much higher for geographic
              hold-out scenarios than for the domain shift scenarios. When generalizing to biogeophysically distinct regions,
              overall RMSE increases between 0.69°C and 1.78°C for both models, whereas generalizing to shifting domain
              conditions leads to changes in RMSE of less than 0.1°C. For both models, the largest loss in performance occurs
              when attempting to generalize to the plateau region in the northernmost part of the study area, although RGCN
              also does poorly for the coastal region.

              For the warmest 10% of observations, the warming scenario led to a slight improvement in performance compared
              to the baseline for GWN. This increase in performance is likely due to increased reservoir management during




              Figure 5. Change in performance between baseline models and generalization scenarios. Bars and whiskers represent mean
              and standard error of loss in performance across all combinations of replicates.


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                      11 of 19
                                                                                                                                                                      19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                                    Water Resources Research                                                      10.1029/2022WR033880


                                                                                     the hottest years that decreases the hard-to-predict warmest observations
                                                                                     despite air temperatures being higher. Although we do not have explicit data
                                                                                     on reservoir releases, the possibility of increased releases in the warming
                                                                                     scenario is supported by the fact that the difference in the 90th percentile
                                                                                     of air temperatures between the test partitions of the warming scenario and
                                                                                     baseline is 0.62°C. This difference is larger than the difference in the 90th
                                                                                     percentile of water temperature observations, which is only 0.3°C, indicating
                                                                                     that higher water temperatures are modulated by reservoir releases. However,
                                                                                     this difference in air and water temperature may possibly be driven by other
                                                                                     mitigating drivers such as groundwater.


                                                                                     3.3. Spatial Awareness

                                                                                     Simple permutation-based interpretability experiments highlight distinct
                                                                                     ways in which the two models capture spatial dependencies. On average,
                                                                                     for the baseline scenario, RGCN predictions change by 4.11°C when spatial
                                                                                     information is shuffled compared to 5.78°C for GWN (Figure 6). Both
                                                                                     models show increasing sensitivity to noise along the mainstem from the
                                                                                     northern plateau region to the mouth of the Delaware River indicating an
                                                                                     accumulation of upstream information. For GWN, this increase continues up
                                                                                     until the tidally influenced reaches near the mouth of the river where sensi-
                                                                                     tivity to spatial noise decreases again, likely due to a shift in drivers from
                                                                                     upstream temperatures to tidal stage, ocean temperature, and storm surges,
                                                                                     which are not accounted for in model inputs. For RGCN, sensitivity in the
                                                                                     plateau region is higher than in the coastal plain whereas the reverse is true
                                                                                     for GWN.
Figure 6. Sensitivity of Graph WaveNet and Recurrent Graph Convolution
Network to loss of spatial information. Values calculated by iteratively             The two models also vary in the spatial relationships they learn regard-
retaining true inputs at each reach, shuffling all other reaches to remove spatial   ing reservoirs. Reaches affected by reservoirs are on average 17% less
relationships, and then measuring the change in the predicted value between          sensitive to spatial noise than non-affected reaches for GWN compared to
the original and shuffled predictions. Top panels show histograms of absolute
                                                                                     only 6% for RGCN. This decreased sensitivity captures the decoupling of
change in prediction across both models while bottom panels show the spatial
distribution of z-normalized sensitivity for both models.                            reservoir-affected reaches from their upstream neighbors due to dams and
                                                                                     management actions. Similar to the tidal pattern with GWN, both architec-
                                                                                     tures manage to learn to treat reservoir-affected reaches differently despite
                                                                                     reservoirs not being represented in any of the inputs.

                                            To add robustness to our interrogation of spatial awareness, we calculated prediction attribution using expected
                                            gradients for three target reaches throughout the watershed. The expected gradients results provide insight into
                                            where within the watershed a given reach is relying on spatial information. For our three target reaches, we see
                                            that RGCN relies heavily upon the input features all along the main-stem for predictions at the target reaches
                                            (Figure 7). This mainstem dependency contrasts with GWN, which relies more heavily on the input features of
                                            nearby reaches upstream from the target reach. This is partially due to the power series of transition matrices in
                                            the diffusion model adopted by GWN. RGCN also presents some physically unrealistic spatial dependencies,
                                            with heavy dependence on downstream inputs for upstream predictions. In terms of total attribution, both models
                                            rely on local versus non-local information at similar rates. Of the total prediction attribution, ∼72% on average is
                                            attributed to inputs for the non-target reaches and ∼28% is attributed to inputs for the target reaches. Between the
                                            two models, the key difference is that GWN relies a smaller amount on numerous reaches whereas RGCN relies
                                            heavily on a smaller number of reaches.


                                            3.4. Temporal Awareness

                                            Permutation-based and expected gradient analyses of temporal influences indicate that the LSTM architecture
                                            in RGCN is generally capable of learning longer temporal dependencies than the dilated temporal convolution
                                            in GWN. Across 38 test sequences that are temporally aligned across the two models (end on the same day), on
                                            average 90% of total prediction attribution occurs within the 17 days leading to the target prediction for GWN


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                                               12 of 19
                                                                                                                                              19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                     Water Resources Research                                                            10.1029/2022WR033880




              Figure 7. Spatial distribution of prediction attribution for Graph WaveNet and Recurrent Graph Convolution Network
              models for three reaches throughout the Delaware River Basin. Attribution is calculated as the percent of total expected
              gradients for each reach.


              compared to 85 days for RGCN. This difference indicates that input features farther back in time have a stronger
              influence on the final predicted value for RGCN (Figure 8, top). This difference also helps explain differences
              in hypertuning results for the two models that showed GWN performing best with a relatively short 45-day
              lookback period whereas RGCN performed best with a longer 90-day lookback period. Attributions early in the
              sequence for both models are small relative to large attributions for features directly before the target prediction.




              Figure 8. (top) Cumulative attribution to predictions on the last day of the sequence across 38 test sequences for Graph
              WaveNet and Recurrent Graph Convolution Network models. (bottom) Mean and standard deviation of expected gradients for
              dynamic inputs across the same 38 sequences broken down by season. Insets represent the relative total contribution of each
              feature across timesteps. Note that sequence length for the two models varies.


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                        13 of 19
                                                                                                                                      19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                    Water Resources Research                                                      10.1029/2022WR033880


              For example, for both models, approximately 40% of total prediction attribution comes from inputs in the last
              2 days leading up to the target prediction.

              Seasonally, we observe largely physically realistic relationships between various drivers and their effects on the
              target prediction. During the summer months, positive expected gradients for air temperature are attributed to
              warmer predictions of stream temperature, with the highest influence on the model in the days closest to the target
              prediction. The inverse is true in the winter months - negative expected gradients for air temperature are attributed
              to colder predictions of stream temperature. For GWN, we see the largest influence from potential evapotranspi-
              ration during the spring season when we would expect leaf-out to substantially increase evapotranspiration rates.
              Expected gradients for RGCN show the accumulation of many small attributions from input features early in the
              sequence (Figure 8, top), particularly for predictions occurring in the winter. We also observe a distinct difference
              in the general shape of the expected gradients for both models, likely due to distinct differences in model architec-
              tures. GWN attributions are slightly more erratic, potentially due to the interactions between timesteps captured
              as the dilation factor increases with model depth. Attributions for RGCN are comparatively much smoother as
              temporal information is transferred sequentially from one step to the next in the LSTM.

              Permutation-based temporal experiments indicate that RGCN is more sensitive to temporal noise than GWN
              (Figure S3 in Supporting Information S1). Predictions for both models are least sensitive to temporal noise in
              the winter, where 12 (13) days of unshuffled inputs are required for GWN (RGCN) to keep the target prediction
              within 0.5°C of the original prediction on unshuffled inputs. Sensitivity is highest in the fall, where RGCN needs
              on average 142 days of unperturbed inputs to keep the target prediction within 0.5°C compared to only 29 days for
              GWN. This longer period of sensitivity to noise for RGCN supports the expected gradients results and potentially
              indicates that RGCN learns longer term temporal dependencies.


              4. Discussion
              Our results indicate that the diffusion graph convolution within GWN is more capable of learning physically real-
              istic spatial relationships than the single layer graph convolution used within RGCN. This result is supported by
              existing research done by A. Y. Sun et al. (2021) showing that the diffusion convolution used in GWN better repre-
              sented relationships between basins in the CAMELS (Newman et al., 2015) data set than ChebNet (Defferrard
              et al., 2016), which implements a graph convolution similar to RGCN presented here. Permutation-based exper-
              iments show GWN relies more heavily on spatial information, with predictions changing on average by 5.78°C
              when statistical relationships with neighboring reaches are removed compared to only 4.11°C for RGCN.

              Comparing the spatial patterns in sensitivity before and after fine-tuning also indicates that GWN is more capable
              of “unlearning” incorrect spatial relationships gained from pre-training. PRMS-SNTemp does not account for
              anthropogenic influences such as dams, nor does it account for tidal influences that decouple stream temperature
              at the mouth of the Delaware River from upstream sources. After pretraining, the reach representing the mouth
              of the Delaware River was the 1st and 17th most sensitive to loss of spatial information for GWN and RGCN,
              respectively. After fine-tuning on observations that capture the decoupling of the reach from upstream sources,
              sensitivity in the mouth reach dropped by 32% for GWN and actually increased by 5% for RGCN. This change in
              sensitivity indicates spatial relationships learned by GWN became more physically representative of real-world
              circumstances during fine-tuning when compared to RGCN.

              A similar pattern can be observed in reservoir-affected reaches where management actions and anthropo-
              genic effects decouple spatial relationships. Before fine-tuning but after pre-training, reservoir-affected and
              non-reservoir-affected reaches are equally sensitive (within 2%) to spatial noise. Only after fine-tuning on actual
              temperature observations do we see the sensitivity decrease for reservoir-affected reaches. After fine-tuning,
              sensitivity in reservoir-affected reaches was on average 17% less than non-reservoir-affected reaches for GWN
              compared to only 6% for RGCN.

              Unrealistic relationships learned during pre-training similarly describe part of the loss of performance when
              attempting to generalize to new regions in the geographic hold-out scenarios. The plateau region shows the larg-
              est loss in performance when comparing the holdout scenario to the baseline model. In the plateau region, 31%
              of observations come from a reservoir-affected reach. In the holdout scenario, those reaches are not fine-tuned
              on any observations that capture the actual spatial decoupling with upstream segments and therefore retain the
              unrepresentative spatial dependencies learned in pre-training. Although process guidance through pre-training


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                               14 of 19
                                                                                                                                                                      19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                                Water Resources Research                                                        10.1029/2022WR033880


                                                                               has been shown to help when generalizing seasonally (Read et al., 2019), our
                                                                               results indicate that pretraining, particularly with a process-based model that
                                                                               does not account for anthropogenic effects such as dams, should be done
                                                                               with caution and may ultimately lead to poorly represented spatial dependen-
                                                                               cies if a model cannot successfully ‘unlearn’ unrealistic spatial relationships
                                                                               contained within the process-based model.
                                                                               Results from the expected gradients show nuance within these spatial rela-
                                                                               tionships and emphasize that learned relationships for specific reaches vary in
                                                                               their fidelity to real world processes. Specifically, we see RGCN relying heav-
                                                                               ily on information in downstream reaches for predictions in upstream reaches.
                                                                               We similarly observe that GWN relies more heavily on neighboring tributaries
                                                                               whereas RGCN predictions are largely attributed to main-stem inputs from
                                                                               more randomly distributed reaches. GWN attributions gradually decrease with
                                                                               upstream distance, whereas specific downstream reaches greatly affect RGCN
                                                                               predictions regardless of distance to the target reach (Figure 6).
                                                                                   These learned spatial relationships are in part an artifact of using a bidirec-
                                                                                   tional adjacency matrix that includes both upstream and downstream distances.
                                                                                   Choice of an adjacency matrix is a challenging hyperparameter that can either
                                                                                   be “tuned” by exploring a variety of possible options, or it can be based on the
                                                                                   physical aspects of the system. Here, we chose to account for both upstream
Figure 9. Difference between the median summer (June, July, August) air            and downstream distance because the system contains downstream reaches
temperature for train and test partitions in the warming scenario (left) and       that could either (a) have correlative/statistical relationships with upstream
difference in median annual precipitation between train and test partitions for    reaches or (b) physically influence an upstream reach. These reaches include
drought scenario (right). Warm colors indicate warmer/drier conditions.
                                                                                   those above reservoirs and those in the tidally affected Delaware Bay, where
                                                                                   tidal effects extend as far as ∼90 river kilometers upstream. Expected gradi-
                                                                                   ents provide insight into how both models learn from the choice of the adja-
                                              cency matrix. The results presented here highlight that GWN still learns physically realistic spatial dependencies
                                              despite flexibility in the adjacency matrix whereas RGCN leverages statistically (if not physically) relevant infor-
                                              mation both upstream and downstream from predictions.
                                         This distinction in learned relationships between physically realistic ones and those based purely on statistical
                                         relationships often arises in discussions about deep learning (e.g., are we getting the right answers for the right
                                         reasons? Lapuschkin et al., 2019). The domain-shift experiments presented here indicate that although both
                                         physical and statistical relationships contribute to increased performance when applying the model to a domain
                                         well represented in the training data (our baseline scenario), more realistic spatial awareness increases a model's
                                         fidelity when domains shift toward out-of-bounds conditions.
                                         We simulated shifting domains by withholding the 10 hottest and 10 driest years for model testing to understand
                                         how the models might perform under future climate conditions. Examining the spatial distribution of temperatures
                                         and precipitation during these warm/dry years helps us understand why statistical relationships learned by the model
                                         may become detrimental once domains begin to shift. Specifically, when we look at the median difference between
                                         summer air temperature and annual precipitation for the train and test partitions in each scenario, we see that the
                                         abnormally hot/dry conditions are heterogeneously distributed throughout the river network (Figure 9). For RGCN,
                                         which relies heavily on downstream conditions for predictions, heterogeneously distributed domain shift is less likely
                                         to correctly propagate through and lead to accurate predictions. Conversely, GWN relies more heavily on physically
                                         realistic upstream relationships allowing for varying domain conditions to propagate throughout the network. Shift-
                                         ing domain conditions may break down statistical relationships but still abide by physical ones, allowing a model that
                                         has learned physical relationships to maintain its high performance as environmental conditions change.
                                         Model interrogation revealed distinct variations in the ability to capture temporal relationships between the tempo-
                                         ral convolution in GWN and the LSTM in RGCN. Specifically, RGCN retains a longer memory and integrates the
                                         influence of longer temporal dependencies into predictions. Expected gradients and the permutation experiments
                                         show that RGCN relies on information from model inputs up to 140 days prior to a target prediction depending
                                         on season (Figure S4 in Supporting Information S1). However, the DRB is a rain-dominated system where near-
                                         term soil saturation, precipitation, and air temperature drive key hydrological factors like stream temperature and


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                                              15 of 19
                                                                                                                                         19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                     Water Resources Research                                                       10.1029/2022WR033880


              discharge. Although work done in more snow dominated catchments has shown that LSTMs can learn long-term
              snow-water-storage dynamics (Jiang et al., 2022), other antecedent meteorological variables generally lose their
              autocorrelation with hydrological variables beyond 30 days prior to the target conditions (Khanal et al., 2019). It
              is possible that the LSTM within RGCN is learning relationships between shallow-groundwater and meteorologi-
              cal drivers, which could influence stream temperature on the scale of ∼100 days. However, it is also possible that
              the LSTM is leveraging statistical relationships temporally rather than physical ones.
              Here, the ability of GWN to outperform RGCN using fewer timesteps indicates that GWN does not require longer
              sequences to achieve high predictive accuracy. However, the current results do not inform us on whether GWN
              can learn longer term temporal dependencies. GWN is based off of WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016) which
              is explicitly designed to capture long range temporal dependencies, and existing work by A. Y. Sun et al. (2021)
              has shown that a 365 day lookback period improved performance of GWN when predicting discharge on the
              CAMELS data set. In the context of stream temperature, the ability of GWN to learn long term signals could be
              tested more explicitly with experiments done in catchments with large amounts of snowpack that lead to longer-
              term autocorrelation of temperature and meteorological variables. Implementing such an experiment would help
              determine if GWN can learn longer term dependencies and if the relatively short memory (∼45 days) achieved
              here is indicative of a shortcoming in the model. The same experiments could also provide insight on whether
              the relatively long memory of RGCN is a strength or if the model is leveraging statistical relationships with
              questionable physical relevance.
              Although our results indicate distinct strengths and weaknesses to each of the models explored here, it is impor-
              tant to note that the goal of the research is to better understand how model architecture affects learned spatial and
              temporal dependencies rather than to promote one model as being “better” than another. The analysis presented
              here highlights that GWN tends to learn nearby upstream and near-term relationships compared to longer distance
              (upstream and downstream) and long-term relationships in RGCN. However, both models are sensitive to hyper-
              parameter tuning and choice of adjacency matrix, and the grid-search approach to hyperparameter tuning used
              here may have led to a sub-optimal configuration for one or both models in one or more of the scenarios. For
              example, we assumed hyperparameters for the baseline scenario would be ideal for the generalization scenarios
              which may not be a valid assumption.
              Here, we would like to emphasize that understanding the strengths and weaknesses of a model through interro-
              gation beyond simple performance metrics is an important and under-reported aspect of deep learning in water
              resources. We have attempted to highlight this fact using two different model architectures with previous hydro-
              logical applications; however, the growth of spatially and temporally aware deep learning models (e.g., Bai
              et al., 2021; Li et al., 2018; Pareja et al., 2020) provides further opportunities to better understand the effects of a
              wider variety of architectures, including different combinations of methods for accounting for spatial and tempo-
              ral dependencies. Such investigations could guide model development and improve the understanding of physical
              processes, or lack thereof, captured by different deep learning methodologies.
              When done appropriately, XAI can help improve understanding and trust in model predictions. The work
              presented here highlights how relatively simple permutation- and gradient-based approaches provide detailed
              understanding of how models achieve the predictions they do, the fidelity of learned relationships to real world
              physical processes, and how those learned relationships affect a model's ability to perform under shifting domain
              conditions. XAI results also highlight the importance, benefits, and potential shortcomings of process guidance
              and spatial awareness within model architecture. Although the importance of spatial awareness is well recognized
              in fields such as traffic prediction (Li et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2019), it is much less commonly implemented in
              deep learning hydrology with a few notable exceptions (Jia et al., 2021; A. Y. Sun et al., 2021, 2022). This lack
              of spatial focus contrasts a substantial effort to capture temporal dependencies. Temporally aware deep learning
              models including LSTMs (Feng et al., 2020; Kratzert et al., 2018; Sadler et al., 2022), gated recurrent units (Gao
              et al., 2020), and transformers (Yin et al., 2022) are quickly outperforming existing process-based and statistical
              models for variables such as streamflow and temperature. Our study highlights that learning spatial dependencies
              deserves similar attention to temporal dependencies as hydrological deep learning continues to evolve.


              5. Conclusion
              The work presented here has strong implications for accurate historical predictions and long-term projections
              under shifting domain conditions. CMIP5 climate projections for the DRB indicate that mean summer air


TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                  16 of 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                     19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                                      Water Resources Research                                                                          10.1029/2022WR033880


                                              temperatures will likely increase by 3–7°C by the end of the century depending on future emissions (Abatzoglou
                                              & Brown, 2012). These changes could negatively affect drinking water for millions of people and substantially
                                              reduce the habitat of threatened species in the basin. Effective management of our water resources would benefit
                                              from trust in the generalizability of our modeling efforts. Similar to the “warming” observed in our hold-out
                                              years, future warming will not be spatially homogeneous, with higher levels of warming predicted for the inland
                                              and headwater regions of the basin (Figure S1 in Supporting Information S1). We need a deeper understanding
                                              of how model architecture influences the learning of spatial and temporal dependencies across large scales. This
                                              study provides increased insight and understanding of how stream temperature models perform under shifting
                                              domain conditions. Such understanding is the first step to effectively managing critical freshwater resources for
                                              a changing future.


                                              Data Availability Statement
                                              All the data used for this analysis can be found at https://doi.org/10.5066/P9GD8I7A (Oliver et al., 2021) Code
                                              used for data processing and model development can be found at https://doi.org/10.5066/P9HU7BLR (Topp
                                              et al., 2023).


Acknowledgments                               References
Any use of trade, firm, or product names
is for descriptive purposes only and          Abatzoglou, J. T., & Brown, T. J. (2012). A comparison of statistical downscaling methods suited for wildfire applications. International Journal
does not imply endorsement by the U.S.           of Climatology, 32(5), 772–780. https://doi.org/10.1002/joc.2312
Government. Funding for this project          Appling, A. P., Oliver, S. K., Read, J. S., Sadler, J. M., & Zwart, J. A. (2022). Machine learning for understanding inland water quantity, quality,
was provided in part by the Department           and ecology. In T. Mehner & K. Tockner (Eds.), Encyclopedia of inland waters (2nd ed., pp. 585–606). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/
of Energy ExaSheds Project interagency           B978-0-12-819166-8.00121-3
agreement number 89243021SSC000068.           Bai, J., Zhu, J., Song, Y., Zhao, L., Hou, Z., Du, R., & Li, H. (2021). A3T-GCN: Attention temporal graph convolutional network for traffic
We would like to thank Althea Archer and         forecasting. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information, 10(7), 485. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijgi10070485
Cee Nell for their help designing Figure 1.   Bartholow, J. M. (1991). A modeling assessment of the thermal regime for an urban sport fishery. Environmental Management, 15(6), 833–845.
Thanks also to the anonymous reviewers           https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02394821
who provided constructive feedback to         Bengio, Y., Boulanger-Lewandowski, N., & Pascanu, R. (2013). Advances in optimizing recurrent networks. In 2013 IEEE International Confer-
the manuscript.                                  ence on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (pp. 8624–8628). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP.2013.6639349
                                              Coveney, P. V., Dougherty, E. R., & Highfield, R. R. (2016). Big data needs big theory too. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A,
                                                 374(2080), 20160153. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2016.0153
                                              Cunge, J. A. (2003). Of data and models. Journal of Hydroinformatics, 5(2), 75–98. https://doi.org/10.2166/hydro.2003.0007
                                              Daw, A., Thomas, R. Q., Carey, C. C., Read, J. S., Appling, A. P., & Karpatne, A. (2020). Physics-guided architecture (PGA) of neural networks
                                                 for quantifying uncertainty in lake temperature modeling. In Proceedings of the 2020 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM).
                                                 In Society for industrial and applied mathematics (Vol. 1–0, pp. 532–540). https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611976236.60
                                              Defferrard, M., Bresson, X., & Vandergheynst, P. (2016). Convolutional neural networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering.
                                                 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29. Retreived from https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2016/hash/04df4d434d481c5bb-
                                                 723be1b6df1ee65-Abstract.html
                                              DeWeber, J. T., & Wagner, T. (2014). A regional neural network ensemble for predicting mean daily river water temperature. Journal of Hydrol-
                                                 ogy, 517, 187–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.05.035
                                              DRBC. (2019). An overview of drought in the Delaware River Basin. Delaware River Basin Commission. Retrieved from https://www.state.nj.us/
                                                 drbc/library/documents/drought/DRBdrought-overview_feb2019.pdf
                                              Dugdale, S. J., Hannah, D. M., & Malcolm, I. A. (2017). River temperature modelling: A review of process-based approaches and future direc-
                                                 tions. Earth-Science Reviews, 175, 97–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2017.10.009
                                              Ebersole, J. L., Liss, W. J., & Frissell, C. A. (2001). Relationship between stream temperature, thermal refugia and rainbow trout Oncorhy-
                                                 nchus mykiss abundance in arid-land streams in the northwestern United States. Ecology of Freshwater Fish, 10(1), 1–10. https://doi.
                                                 org/10.1034/j.1600-0633.2001.100101.x
                                              Eberts, S. M., Wagner, C. R., & Woodside, M. D. (2019). Water priorities for the nation—The U.S. Geological Survey next generation water
                                                 observing system (fact sheet 2019–3046). U.S. Geological Survey. https://doi.org/10.3133/fs20193046
                                              Erion, G., Janizek, J. D., Sturmfels, P., Lundberg, S. M., & Lee, S.-I. (2021). Improving performance of deep learning models with axiomatic
                                                 attribution priors and expected gradients. Nature Machine Intelligence, 3(7), 620–631. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-021-00343-w
                                              Falgout, J., Gordon, J., & Davis, M. (2022). USGS advanced research computing. USGS Tallgrass Supercomputer. U.S. Geological Survey.
                                                 https://doi.org/10.5066/P9XE7ROJ
                                              Fan, X., Duan, Q., Shen, C., Wu, Y., & Xing, C. (2020). Global surface air temperatures in CMIP6: Historical performance and future changes.
                                                 Environmental Research Letters, 15(10), 104056. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abb051
                                              Feng, D., Fang, K., & Shen, C. (2020). Enhancing streamflow forecast and extracting insights using long-short term memory networks with data
                                                 integration at continental scales. Water Resources Research, 56(9), e2019WR026793. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019WR026793
                                              Fisher, A., Rudin, C., & Dominici, F. (2019). All models are wrong, but many are useful: Learning a variable’s importance by studying an entire
                                                 class of prediction models Simultaneously. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(177), 1–81.
                                              Gao, S., Huang, Y., Zhang, S., Han, J., Wang, G., Zhang, M., & Lin, Q. (2020). Short-term runoff prediction with GRU and LSTM networks without
                                                 requiring time step optimization during sample generation. Journal of Hydrology, 589, 125188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2020.125188
                                              Greaver, T. L., Clark, C. M., Compton, J. E., Vallano, D., Talhelm, A. F., Weaver, C. P., et al. (2016). Key ecological responses to nitrogen are
                                                 altered by climate change. Nature Climate Change, 6(9), 836–843. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3088
                                              Hanson, P. C., Stillman, A. B., Jia, X., Karpatne, A., Dugan, H. A., Carey, C. C., et al. (2020). Predicting lake surface water phosphorus dynamics
                                                 using process-guided machine learning. Ecological Modelling, 430, 109136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2020.109136



TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                                                                            17 of 19
                                                                                                                                                                       19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                      Water Resources Research                                                                            10.1029/2022WR033880


              Jia, X., Zwart, J., Sadler, J., Appling, A., Oliver, S., Markstrom, S., et al. (2021). Physics-guided recurrent graph model for predicting flow and
                 temperature in river networks. In Proceedings of the 2021 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM). In Society for industrial
                 and applied mathematics (pp. 612–620). https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611976700.69
              Jiang, S., Zheng, Y., Wang, C., & Babovic, V. (2022). Uncovering flooding mechanisms across the contiguous United States through interpretive
                 deep learning on representative catchments. Water Resources Research, 58(1). https://doi.org/10.1029/2021WR030185
              Karpatne, A., Atluri, G., Faghmous, J., Steinbach, M., Banerjee, A., Ganguly, A., et al. (2016). Theory-guided data science: A new paradigm
                 for scientific discovery from data. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 29(10), 2318–2331. https://doi.org/10.1109/
                 TKDE.2017.2720168
              Kaushal, S. S., Likens, G. E., Jaworski, N. A., Pace, M. L., Sides, A. M., Seekell, D., et al. (2010). Rising stream and river temperatures in the
                 United States. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 8(9), 461–466. https://doi.org/10.1890/090037
              Khanal, S., Lutz, A. F., Immerzeel, W. W., de Vries, H., Wanders, N., & van den Hurk, B. (2019). The impact of meteorological and hydrological
                 memory on compound peak flows in the Rhine River Basin. Atmosphere, 10(4), 171. https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos10040171
              Konapala, G., Kao, S.-C., Painter, S., & Lu, D. (2020). Machine learning assisted hybrid models can improve streamflow simulation in diverse
                 catchments across the conterminous US. Environmental Research Letters, 15(10), 104022. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aba927
              Kratzert, F., Klotz, D., Brenner, C., Schulz, K., & Herrnegger, M. (2018). Rainfall–runoff modelling using Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
                 networks. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 22(11), 6005–6022. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-22-6005-2018
              Lapuschkin, S., Wäldchen, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Samek, W., & Müller, K.-R. (2019). Unmasking Clever Hans predictors and assessing
                 what machines really learn. Nature Communications, 10(1), 1096. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-08987-4
              Legates, D. R., & McCabe, G. J., Jr. (1999). Evaluating the use of “goodness-of-fit” measures in hydrologic and hydroclimatic model validation.
                 Water Resources Research, 35(1), 233–241. https://doi.org/10.1029/1998WR900018
              Lessard, J. L., & Hayes, D. B. (2003). Effects of elevated water temperature on fish and macroinvertebrate communities below small dams. River
                 Research and Applications, 19(7), 721–732. https://doi.org/10.1002/rra.713
              Letcher, B. H., Hocking, D. J., O’Neil, K., Whiteley, A. R., Nislow, K. H., & O’Donnell, M. J. (2016). A hierarchical model of daily stream
                 temperature using air-water temperature synchronization, autocorrelation, and time lags. PeerJ, 4, e1727. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.1727
              Li, Y., Yu, R., Shahabi, C., & Liu, Y. (2018). Diffusion convolutional recurrent neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting. ICLR. https://doi.
                 org/10.48550/arXiv.1707.01926
              Marcinkevičs, R., & Vogt, J. E. (2020). Interpretability and explainability: A machine learning zoo mini-tour. ArXiv:2012.01805 [Cs]. https://
                 doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2012.01805
              Markstrom, S. (2012). P2S—Coupled simulation with the precipitation-runoff modeling system (PRMS) and the stream temperature network
                 (SNTemp) models, (p. 19). Open-File Report 2012–1116. U.S. Geological Survey. https://doi.org/10.3133/ofr20121116
              Markstrom, S. L., Regan, R. S., Hay, L. E., Viger, R. J., Webb, R. M., Payn, R. A., & LaFontaine, J. H. (2015). PRMS-IV, the precipitation-runoff
                 modeling system, version 4. Techniques and Methods 6-B7. U.S. Geological Survey. https://doi.org/10.3133/tm6B7
              Nan, M., Trăscău, M., Florea, A. M., & Iacob, C. C. (2021). Comparison between recurrent networks and temporal convolutional networks
                 approaches for skeleton-based action recognition. Sensors, 21(6), 2051. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21062051
              Newman, A. J., Clark, M. P., Sampson, K., Wood, A., Hay, L. E., Bock, A., et al. (2015). Development of a large-sample watershed-scale hydro-
                 meteorological data set for the contiguous USA: Data set characteristics and assessment of regional variability in hydrologic model perfor-
                 mance. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 19(1), 209–223. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-19-209-2015
              Oliver, S. K., Zwart, J. A., Appling, A., Atshan, R. A., Sadler, J. M., Corson-Dosch, H. R., & Read, J. S. (2021). Predicting water temperature in
                 the Delaware River Basin. [Dataset]. U.S. Geological Survey. https://doi.org/10.5066/P9GD8I7A
              Omernik, J. M. (1987). Ecoregions of the conterminous United States. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 77(1), 118–125.
                 https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8306.1987.tb00149.x
              Pareja, A., Domeniconi, G., Chen, J., Ma, T., Suzumura, T., Kanezashi, H., et al. (2020). EvolveGCN: Evolving graph convolutional networks
                 for dynamic graphs. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, (Vol. 34(04), pp. 5363–5370). https://doi.org/10.1609/
                 aaai.v34i04.5984
              Read, J. S., Jia, X., Willard, J., Appling, A. P., Zwart, J. A., Oliver, S. K., et al. (2019). Process-guided deep learning predictions of lake water
                 temperature. Water Resources Research, 55(11), 9173–9190. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019WR024922
              Regan, R. S., Juracek, K. E., Hay, L. E., Markstrom, S. L., Viger, R. J., Driscoll, J. M., et al. (2019). The U. S. Geological Survey National
                 Hydrologic Model infrastructure: Rationale, description, and application of a watershed-scale model for the conterminous United States.
                 Environmental Modelling & Software, 111, 192–203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2018.09.023
              Rosenberry, D. O., Briggs, M. A., Voytek, E. B., & Lane, J. W. (2016). Influence of groundwater on distribution of dwarf wedgemussels (Alas-
                 midonta heterodon) in the upper reaches of the Delaware River, northeastern USA. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 20(10), 4323–4339.
                 https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-20-4323-2016
              Sadler, J. M., Appling, A. P., Read, J. S., Oliver, S. K., Jia, X., Zwart, J. A., & Kumar, V. (2022). Multi-task deep learning of daily streamflow and
                 water temperature. Water Resources Research, 58(4), e2021WR030138. https://doi.org/10.1029/2021WR030138
              Sanders, M. J., Markstrom, S. L., Regan, R. S., & Atkinson, R. D. (2017). Documentation of a daily mean stream temperature module—
                 An enhancement to the precipitation-runoff modeling system. In Techniques and Methods (No. 6-D4). U.S. Geological Survey. https://doi.
                 org/10.3133/tm6D4
              Shleifer, S., McCreery, C., & Chitters, V. (2019). Incrementally improving Graph WaveNet performance on traffic prediction. ArXiv:1912.07390
                 [Cs, Eess]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.07390
              Somers, K. A., Bernhardt, E. S., Grace, J. B., Hassett, B. A., Sudduth, E. B., Wang, S., & Urban, D. L. (2013). Streams in the urban heat island:
                 Spatial and temporal variability in temperature. Freshwater Science, 32(1), 309–326. https://doi.org/10.1899/12-046.1
              Student (1908). The probable error of a mean. Biometrika, 6(1), 1–25. https://doi.org/10.2307/2331554
              Sun, A. Y., Jiang, P., Mudunuru, M. K., & Chen, X. (2021). Explore spatio-temporal learning of large sample hydrology using graph neural
                 networks. Water Resources Research, 57(12). https://doi.org/10.1029/2021WR030394
              Sun, A. Y., Jiang, P., Yang, Z.-L., Xie, Y., & Chen, X. (2022). A graph neural network approach to basin-scale river network learning: The role of
                 physics-based connectivity and data fusion. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences Discussions, 1–35. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-2022-111
              Sun, B., Feng, J., & Saenko, K. (2016). Return of frustratingly easy domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on
                 Artificial Intelligence (pp. 2058–2065). https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v30i1.10306
              Sundararajan, M., Taly, A., & Yan, Q. (2017). Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
                 Machine Learning, (pp. 3319–3328). https://doi.org/10.5555/3305890.3306024
              Topp, S. N., Barclay, J., Diaz, J., Sun, A., Jia, X., Lu, D., et al. (2023). Examining the influence of deep learning architecture on generalizability
                 for predicting stream temperature in the Delaware River Basin. U.S. Geological Survey. https://doi.org/10.5066/P9HU7BLR



TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                                             18 of 19
                                                                                                                                                                       19447973, 2023, 4, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2022WR033880, Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                      Water Resources Research                                                                            10.1029/2022WR033880


              van den Oord, A., Dieleman, S., Zen, H., Simonyan, K., Vinyals, O., Graves, A., et al. (2016). WaveNet: A generative model for raw audio.
                arXiv:1609.03499. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1609.03499
              van Vliet, M. T. H., Franssen, W. H. P., Yearsley, J. R., Ludwig, F., Haddeland, I., Lettenmaier, D. P., & Kabat, P. (2013). Global river discharge
                and water temperature under climate change. Global Environmental Change, 23(2), 450–464. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.11.002
              Willard, J., Jia, X., Xu, S., Steinbach, M., & Kumar, V. (2022). Integrating scientific knowledge with machine learning for engineering and envi-
                ronmental systems. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(4), 66:1–66:37. https://doi.org/10.1145/3514228
              Williamson, T. N., Lant, J. G., Claggett, P. R., Nystrom, E. A., Milly, P. C. D., Nelson, H. L., et al. (2015). Summary of hydrologic modeling for the
                Delaware River Basin using the Water Availability Tool for Environmental Resources (WATER). Scientific Investigations Report 2015–5143.
                U.S. Geological Survey. Retrieved from http://pubs.er.usgs.gov/publication/sir20155143
              Wu, Z., Pan, S., Long, G., Jiang, J., & Zhang, C. (2019). Graph WaveNet for deep spatial-temporal graph modeling. In Proceedings of the 28th
                International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 1907–1913). Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/10453/141221
              Yin, H., Guo, Z., Zhang, X., Chen, J., & Zhang, Y. (2022). RR-Former: Rainfall-runoff modeling based on Transformer. Journal of Hydrology,
                609, 127781. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2022.127781
              Yu, F., & Koltun, V. (2016). Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convolutions. ArXiv:1511.07122 [Cs]. https://doi.org/10.48550/
                arXiv.1511.07122
              Yvon-Durocher, G., Jones, J. I., Trimmer, M., Woodward, G., & Montoya, J. M. (2010). Warming alters the metabolic balance of ecosystems.
                Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 365(1549), 2117–2126. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2010.0038




TOPP ET AL.                                                                                                                                             19 of 19
